---
title: "Marked temporal point processes for simulating and capturing coordinated behaviour"
collection: talks
type: "Oral Talk"
permalink: /talks/2025-09-05-talk-1
venue: "Conference on Complex Systems CCS 2025"
date: 2025-09-05
location: "Siena, SI, ITA"
---

**CCS2025 - Contributed talk #253**

In recent years, the rise of social media has accelerated information dissemination. Unfortunately, this has been accompanied by a surge in disinformation — deliberate efforts to mislead and manipulate public perception. Disinformation campaigns, orchestrated to distort facts and sow societal discord, have emerged as one of modern society’s most pressing challenges. As the European External Action Service Report highlights, coordinated online activity - particularly in content and timing - significantly enhances the manipulative power of such campaigns. Comprehending these dynamics is crucial for developing effective detection mechanisms to identify and mitigate the impact of disinformation campaigns.

This research investigates the detection of coordinated inauthentic accounts. These are characterized by systematic and synergistic actions that anomalously amplify their content compared to authentic user temporal patterns. These patterns can be effectively modelled using marked temporal point processes, stochastic processes that capture event timing, types, and interactions. These processes are particularly well-suited for modelling social media activities, where users perform actions at specific timestamps. We investigate the detection of coordination via the application of marked temporal point processes.

Elisa, Muratore      (1,2,3)
Letizia, Iannucci    (1)
Riccardo, Gallotti   (2)
Claudio, Agostinelli (3)
Mikko, Kivel¨a       (1)

1. Aalto University, Helsinki Finland
2. Bruno Kessler Foundation, Trento Italy
3. Trento University, Trento Italy