---
title: "How to design a collection strategy for monitoring disinformation and hate speech in Telegram"
collection: talks
type: "Poster Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2025-09-01-talk-2
venue: "Conference on Complex Systems CCS 2025"
date: 2025-09-01
location: "Siena, SI, ITA"
---

**CCS2025 - Poster Presentation #263**

Social media platforms have become central spaces for user engagement, but this expansion has also amplified issues like disinformation and hate speech. As research interest in these topics grows, obtaining social media data has been crucial, yet platforms are increasingly restricting such access. In response, researchers are exploring alternative sources, such as Telegram, which offers an open-access API. However, Telegram’s data collection dynamics present distinct challenges. Unlike popular platforms like X, Telegram’s structure is fragmented, with each channel operating as a self-contained stream. To access content, users must actively navigate to individual channels, making it challenging to identify and select relevant data to collect. Additionally, the lack of keyword search and the risk of data volume explosions when retrieving messages complicate the process, requiring a thoughtful approach to select relevant chats.

In this study, we tackle these challenges by introducing a systematic, and task-driven strategy to effectively collect data from channels linked to disinformation and hate speech. This work is part of the Hatedemics project, which aims to combat hate speech and disinformation through AI-based technologies. By leveraging Telegram data, we seek to fill the gap left by increasingly restrictive data policies on other platforms, while also exploring the dynamics of harmful content dissemination in less-regulated digital environments. The final goal of this project is educational, with the aim of creating a didactic and multilingual dataset to train citizens in actively combat hate speech and disinformation.

Elisa, Muratore (1,2)  
Thomas, Louf (1)  
Elisa, Leonardelli (1,2)  
Riccardo, Gallotti (1,2)  

1. Bruno Kessler Foundation, Trento Italy
2. Hatedemics consortium, CERV-funded project


Materials
======
Extended abstract: [https://elisamuratore00.github.io/files/talk1.pdf]([https://elisamuratore00.github.io/files/talk2.pdf)
Poster: [https://elisamuratore00.github.io/files/slides1.pdf]([https://elisamuratore00.github.io/files/poster1.pdf)
